Concept: Conditionals (#712)
exercism/bash: concepts/conditionals/introduction.md

# Introduction

## Truthiness in Bash

Bash does not have the concept of boolean values.
There are strings and numbers, and arrays of strings or numbers.
So how do conditional commands deal with true and false?

> ## Exit Statuses

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Exit Status
```

Commands produce an _exit status_ when they end.
An exit status is an integer between 0 and 255 inclusive.
Bash considers a **zero** exit status to represent _success_.
Any other exit status represents _failure_.

> This applies to bash builtin commands and keywords, as well as functions.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This applies to all commands, including bash builtin commands, keywords, and functions.
```

## The "if" Command

The basic syntax of the `if` command is

```bash

> if CONDITIONAL_COMMANDS; then TRUE_COMMANDS; else FALSE_COMMANDS; fi

Reviewer: You may want to mention the `else` is optional

Author: I do, two sentences later.

```

It starts with `if`; the condition commands are separated from the "success" commands by `then`; and it is terminated with `fi`.
The `else` clause is optional.

> CONDITIONAL_COMMANDS can be a single command or it can be a [list of commands][command-list].

Reviewer: Is it worth mentioning that generally the last command in the list sets the exit status of the list?

Author: Unless a previous command fails. I think this can be saved until the pipelines/lists concept.

Reviewer: The exit status of previous commands only matters when `set -e` is enabled :) But sounds good.

if [ -n "$str" ]; then echo "not empty"; else echo "empty"; fi

# leaving the variable unquoted results in incorrect "not empty" output
if [ -n $str ]; then echo "not empty"; else echo "empty"; fi
```

[test]: https://www.gnu.org/software/bash/manual/bash.html#index-test 
~~~~

## "[[" Keyword

The [`[[...]]` conditional construct][cond-construct] is not a _command_, it is a **keyword**.
This means that, although it is handled like any other command, it can have special parsing rules.
What's special about `[[` is that the variables expanded within it are **not** subject to word splitting or filename expansion.
That means this command acts as you expect, even without quoting.

```bash
if [[ -n $str ]]; then echo "not empty"; else echo "empty"; fi
```

`[[` works with all the conditional expressions that `test` and `[` can handle.
In addition, `[[` provides

* the `=~` regular-expression matching operator,
* `==` and `!=` operate as a glob-pattern matching operator,
* `&&` and `||` as logical operators (special parsing rule),
* `<` and `>` as "bare" string comparison operators (special parsing rule: because these are redirection symbols, in `[` they must be escaped).

> It is the author's opinion that these special features offer so much benefit that `[[` should be used exclusively.

Reviewer: It's the bash community's opinion, too :)

## The "case" Command

[`case`][case] is another control flow command. 
It is like a "switch" statement in other languages.

```bash
case WORD in [PATTERN [| PATTERN]...) COMMANDS ;;]... esac
```

The WORD is matched against each PATTERN.
When one matches, the COMMANDS are executed.

```bash
read -p "Guess the secret word: " word

> case $word in

Reviewer: ```suggestion
case "$word" in
```

Author: This is an annoying one. Like variable assignments, no word splitting or file expansion is done there. But it looks wrong when it's bare.

    secret)
        echo "Yes, you guessed it!"
        ;;
    s*)
        echo "You guessed the first letter."
        ;;
    *)
        echo "Not even close! Try again."
        ;;
esac
```

> Each COMMANDS clause must end with **two** semicolons `;;`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Each COMMANDS clause must end with **two** semicolons, `;;`.
```

To emphasize: it is the **exit status** of the conditional commands that controls the flow.
As an example, `grep` returns 0 if a match is found, and 1 if a match is not found.
The `-q` option suppresses output, only producing the exit status.

```bash
if grep -q "my pattern" my_file; then echo "the pattern is found in the file"; fi
```

## "[" and "test" Commands

There is no special syntax around the CONDITIONAL_COMMANDS.
You may be used to seeing if statements that look like this:

```if
if [ "$password" = "secure" ]; then
    echo "Welcome!"
fi
```

`[` is not special syntax.
It is a _command_ that evaluates the conditional expression and exits with a success/failure status.
Like all commands, whitespace is **required** between it and its arguments.

`[` is actually a synonym for the `test` command.
They are exactly the same, except that the last argument to `[` _must_ be `]`.

### Conditional Expressions

Within `[` and `]`, you write a conditional expression.
Some typical conditional expressions include:

```bash
[ -f "$filename" ]             # file operations
[ "$string1" = "$string2" ]    # string comparisons
[ "$num1" -eq "$num2" ]        # arithmetic comparisons
```

> There are many more operations available: they are listed in the [Bash Conditional Expressions][cond-expr] section of the manual.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
There are many more operations available; they are listed in the [Bash Conditional Expressions][cond-expr] section of the manual.
```

~~~~exercism/note
In the examples above, notice that all the variables are quoted.
The `test` and `[` commands are plain commands, where the arguments are subject to word splitting and filename expansion like any other command.

This is important to point out because conditional expressions are evaluated differently based on _how many arguments_ you provide:

* 0 arguments: the exit status is non-zero (failure)
* 1 argument: the exit status is zero (success) if the argument is not empty, non-zero if it is empty.
* 2 arguments: the first argument must be a unary operator (such as `[ -z "$name" ]`), or a `!` (negating the status of the 1-argument test)
* and [more][test].

You can get unexpected results if you forget to quote:

```bash
str=""

# this prints "empty"
if [ -n "$str" ]; then echo "not empty"; else echo "empty"; fi

# leaving the variable unquoted results in incorrect "not empty" output
if [ -n $str ]; then echo "not empty"; else echo "empty"; fi
```

[test]: https://www.gnu.org/software/bash/manual/bash.html#index-test
~~~~

## "[[" Keyword

The [`[[...]]` conditional construct][cond-construct] is not a _command_, it is a **keyword**.

> This means that, although it is handled like any other command, it can have special parsing rules.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This means that, although it is handled like any other command, it has special parsing rules.
```

What's special about `[[` is that the variables expanded within it are **not** subject to word splitting or filename expansion.
That means this command acts as you expect, even without quoting.

```bash
if [[ -n $str ]]; then echo "not empty"; else echo "empty"; fi
```

> `[[` works with all the conditional expressions that `test` and `[` can handle.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
`[[` supports all the conditional expressions that `test` and `[` can handle.
```
